What is this?
-------------

This tool measures qcow2 file internal fragmentation. Usage is simply:

$ qcow2.pl file.qcow2

Fragmentation measure is based on the length of what I loosely term contiguous
clusters: these are clusters where both the physical and virtual address of the
virtual -> physical mapping are ascending. It implies that contiguous reading
of data in the virtual machine can perform contiguous reading on the host side.

This suggests a method to measure fragmentation score: when walking through the
virtual addresses, every time the physical address steps backwards in the file,
the fragmentation score is increased by 1.  The fragmentation score is
converted proportional to the image size by dividing it with the count of
mapped clusters.

Similarly, the average length of such contiguous clusters is measured.
Together, these pieces of information can be used to determine the degree of
fragmentation of the file.

Why should I bother?
--------------------

On SSD, you can probably ignore the fragmentation problem entirely. However,
on rotational media seek penalty still applies. Backwards seeks are adding
significant latency to reading of a file, whereas short forward seeks are
expected by the drive firmware and generally perform very well.

Knowing about the degree of fragmentation and in particular average contiguous
cluster length helps you determine if you are likely harmed by extra seeks.
For instance, one disk image had average contiguous cluster length of just 5.6
MB, and after defragging its average contiguous chunk rose to 300 MB.

Snapshots
---------

The tool is ignorant of the snapshots in a file, it will simply read the active
tables of the disk image. Files with snapshots are likely to get far worse
fragmentation scores, because snapshots are going to refer to locations earlier
in the disk routinely.

Ok, so my qcow2 file is fragmented. Now what?
---------------------------------------------

To defragment qcow2 file, shutdown the VM on it and rewrite it using
qemu-img/kvm-img tool:

$ kvm-img convert -O qcow2 fragmentedfile.qcow2 defragmentedfile.qcow2

You can then replace fragmentedfile by defragmentedfile after validating that your
virtual machine still boots from the rewritten disk image.

The big picture
---------------

To fully defragment the disk image, you need to also ensure that the disk image
file itself is fairly contiguous on the host filesystem.  To defragment the
file in host filesystem, use XFS, ext4 or btrfs filesystem, which all have
defragmenting tools: xfs_fsr, e4defrag, and btrfs filesystem defragment.

On my ext4 filesystems, I typically get around 120 MB extents after e4defrag,
which implies that once average contiguous chunk lengths in qcow2 are of
similar size, the host filesystem becomes the larger problem of the two.

On xfs, contiguous chunks can be much larger.

I have not yet tried btrfs for virtual machines.
